ARMAMENT
Challenges of Atmanirbharta in Naval Aviation
by Gp Capt (Dr.) Rajiv Kumar Narang VM (Retd.)

The Indian Navy has been a torchbearer of Atmanirbharta in ship and submarine building. It has taken several initiatives to handhold the Indian industry, start-ups, academia, and innovators to develop emerging and innovative naval technologies. It is transforming from a buyer's navy to a builder's navy in shipbuilding. Not joining indigenous aviation development projects that could be leveraged for building indigenous capability, or withdrawing consent from indigenous projects midway, or importing similar systems, or delaying induction of indigenous systems with potential for adverse implications on Atmanirbharta trajectory, are characteristics that are often not related to the Indian Navy.

However, Naval Aviation did not have a self-reliance trajectory similar to shipbuilding, which faces significant challenges. Several naval aviation development programmes, such as Advanced Light Helicopter (Navy) or ALH (Navy), Light Utility Helicopter (Navy) or LUH (Navy), Light Combat Aircraft Mark-1 (Navy) or LCA Mk-1 (Navy), LCA Mk-2 (Navy), and Naval-Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (N-AMCA). have struggled in operationalisation and induction. Most of them did not meet the Qualitative Requirements (QRs) of the Indian Navy, resulting in the import of similar systems from global Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). Though failures are part of the technology development trajectory, yet most indigenous aviation development project facing operational and induction challenges calls for an in-depth review. Therefore, there is a need to analyse the trajectory of indigenous naval aviation development projects to identify challenges and propose a way forward to achieve Atmanirbharta in naval aviation.

LCA Mk-1 (Navy)

India's indigenous Carrier-Based Fighter (CBF) program commenced with the launch of the development of LCA Mk-1 (Navy). In the beginning, the Indian Navy did not join the LCA Mk-1 project and launched LCA Mk-1 (Navy) in 2003, which was two years after the first flight of LCA Mk-1 (IAF) in 2001. This delay in launch, despite having formulated the Naval Air Staff Requirements (NASR) in 1985 need to be examined. However, withdrawal of the Indian Navy from the LCA Mk-1 (Navy) development programme in 2016 brought it to a halt, barely 13 years after its launch and before it carried out its first landing on Indian aircraft carriers. The decision to withdraw from the project was taken to seek development of twin engine variant of LCA, i.e. Twin-Engine Deck Based Fighter (TEDBF) with greater range and payload. In the meantime, ADA continued with the testing and certification of LCA Mk-1 (Navy), which landed on INS Vikramaditya and INS Virat in 2020 and 2023, respectively. The TEDBF has not been approved and CBF development program has been facing uncertainties since 2016.

The LCA Mk-1 (Navy) was initially designed as a replacement for a single-engine Sea Harrier CBF, and it had comparable operational performance parameters. However, the revised requirements of twin-engine and higher payload could not be met by the LCA Mk-1 (Navy). The LCA Mk-1 (Navy), in its current configuration, has the potential to be deployed as a carrier trainer and air defence fighter. However, it is yet to be inducted, and indecision on its induction could have an adverse impact on the self-reliance trajectory of CBF. While the future of CBF was facing uncertainty after the withdrawal of IN from LCA Mk-1 (Navy), the Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) continued its efforts to propose the development of a follow-on CBF.

LCA Mk-2

On realising the limitations of LCA Mk-1 (Navy), a decision was taken by ADA in consultation with IN to simultaneously develop a larger LCA Mk-2 with an ability to carry higher payloads to meet anti-shipping mission requirements of the Indian Navy. However, IN withdrew from the LCA Mk-2 (Navy) project sometime in late 2017, which had also made significant progress in design configuration by then. The IAF, realising the operational potential of an enhanced range and payload-carrying capacity, decided to join and take forward the LCA Mk-2 project.

TEDBF Vs N-AMCA

Sometime in early 2018, the Indian Navy decided to seek the development of a twin-engine variant of LCA, i.e., Twin Engine Deck Based Fighter (TEDBF), for a higher range and greater payload carrying capability. The TEDBF was proposed to be a canard configuration, 4.5-generation twin-engine CBF powered by General Electric GE-414 engines. However, the IAF did not join this program and instead collaborated with Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) to develop fifth generation plus Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA). The Indian Navy, on the other hand, did not join the development of fifth generation Naval-AMCA project and persisted with the demand for the development of 4.5-generation TEDBF.

TEDBF Survivability Challenge

The survivability of the 4.5-generation TEDBF came under further scrutiny in 2024 with the induction of fifth-generation J-35 and J-20 fighter aircraft by China and the testing of next-generation J-36 and J-50 fighter aircraft. It became apparent that TEDBF could struggle to retain a technological edge in its envisaged lifespan of 30-40 years after its earliest possible induction sometime in 2035.

Impasse in CBF Development

The proposal to develop TEDBF created a stalemate due to apprehensions about its economic, technological edge, and life support viability. The TEDBF project was not approved, and no progress has been made in the CBF development programme since 2016. IN's withdrawal of consent from LCA Mk-1 (Navy) development project, lack of acquisition of LCA Mk-1 (Navy), IN withdrawing from LCA MK-2 (Navy), not joining N-AMCA development projects and lack of approval of TEDBF project could lead to India losing out on the technological gains made in the last two decades of LCA Mk-1 (Navy) CBF development effort.

Impact of Import

The import of 26 Rafale-Marine (Rafale-M) fighter aircraft from France in April 2025 reduced the Indian Navy's requirement of CBF from 87 to 61 aircraft for its fleet of two aircraft carriers. This further reduced the viability of development of separate TEDBF economically and life cycle support-wise. Any, further procurement or Transfer of Technology (ToT) of Rafale-M or any other foreign aircraft would lead to closure of the indigenous CBF development project. Enormous effort was put into the indigenous development of LCA Mk-1 (Navy), and learnings could be lost. This will hurt the viability and sustainability of the indigenous CBF development project in the immediate future and on technological sovereignty in the long run.

Other Aviation Projects

The track record of the Indian Navy in self-reliance has been less than encouraging in other naval aviation platforms as well. It has predominantly imported aviation platforms in its inventory. In the helicopter segment, the Indian Navy delayed acceptance of the Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) and later inducted them in limited numbers due to blade folding challenges. The learnings from blade folding challenges were analysed to develop a blade folding mechanism for the LUH. Later, it did not accept Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) as it did not meet the naval Qualitative Requirements (QRs) of a twin-engine helicopter. However, LUH is a single-engine helicopter of about three-ton weight category, which is of the same weight category as the single-engine Chetak helicopter that is being operated by the IN. The LUH has been accepted both by the Indian Army and the IAF. There is a need to reassess and reexamine the potential of inducting LUH as a replacement of Chetak by IN at least for small ships.

It acquired P-8i aircraft from the United States (US) for Maritime Reconnaissance (MR). The Centre for Airborne Systems (CABS) and the IAF have worked together to develop indigenous Airborne Early Warning (AEW) systems, as exemplified in the manufacturing of C-295 aircraft. However, the Indian Navy has not leveraged the potential of CABS to build indigenous MR and naval AEW Aircraft and helicopters.

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)

In the unmanned segment, indigenous UAV projects such as Tapas, Stealth Wing Flying Test Bed (SWIFT), and Ghatak Stealth Aircraft are at the crucial phase of development. The Indian Navy signed a contract for the acquisition of MQ-9B Medium Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) UAVs from the United States; however, it has not been able to leverage indigenous Tapas, SWIFT, and Ghatak programs to develop and induct indigenous MALE UAVs and Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle (UCAV) in service. Also, the involvement of the Indian Navy in such projects is not of an equal partner as has been the case with ship and submarine building.

Atmanirbharta Challenges

The Indian Navy has formulated a roadmap for shipbuilding and submarine building. The number of ships and submarines that would be made in the next decade has been decided, and work is in progress to achieve these targets. However, there is no corresponding roadmap for the development of indigenous manned and unmanned aviation platforms and associated systems. Also, there is no roadmap for the indigenous development of helicopters, manned aircraft, UAVs, AEW, MR and Anti-submarine roles. All the indigenous naval aircraft development projects, i.e., LCA Mk-1 (Navy), LCA Mk-2 (Navy), N-AMCA, LUH, and ALH have struggled to meet operational requirements of the Indian Navy and their development and induction have faced challenges. These factors thus need to be factored into the Atmanirbharta calculus.

The inconsonance in indigenous development of naval aircraft and challenges of self-reliance in Naval aviation raises following questions: firstly, why has the Indian Navy, known for self-reliance in ship and submarine building, made little progress in naval aviation manufacturing projects? Secondly, why has the Indian Navy remained a buyer's navy in naval aviation despite transforming to a builders' navy in ship and submarine building? Why has the approach of the Indian Navy towards Atmanirbharta in naval aviation remained incoherent and inconsistent? The answer to these questions could vary depending upon the type of challenges but one fact remains constant that course corrections are needed in the naval aviation manufacturing trajectory to make Indian naval aviation, Atmanirbhar.

The Way Forward

The reasons for the import of aircraft from foreign OEMs may be justified technically; however, the lack of a proactive approach to make Indigenous naval aviation development projects successful as an equal partner on the lines of shipbuilding necessitates a course correction. The inconsonance and high failure rate of naval aviation indigenous development projects is a cause for concern and necessitates a review, preferably by an expert committee. The existing approach in naval aviation development projects needs a major overhaul. A few suggestions on making course corrections in the naval aviation development projects are covered next.

In the CBF segment, a timely decision is needed on the limited induction of LCA Mk-1 (Navy), which can function as a replacement for Hawk trainer, a carrier-borne naval jet fighter trainer, and an air defence fighter during contingencies. Additionally, the LCA Mk-2 (Navy) could be developed as an interim 4.5-generation fighter to provide continuity in the CBF trajectory and maintain sovereignty over technology. The experience gained in the design and development of LCA would be crucial in developing indigenous fifth and sixth-generation naval fighters to counter future threats posed by China's naval aviation.

The requirement of additional manpower amid limited resources and high cost of design, development, testing, certification, manufacturing, and providing life cycle support to a small number of TEDBF necessitates that the Indian Navy review its CBF development plan. The transformation of AMCA into CBF (N-AMCA) is a viable option though it would require significant design modifications, and the experience gained in the development of LCA Mk-1 (Navy) would be useful. The launching of N-AMCA could address the current impasse and meet long-term challenges posed by the fifth and next generation fighters of China. The upgradation of MiG-29 could be kept as a standby option to fill the gaps if delays are experienced during the development of N-AMCA. It may also launch or join indigenous MR, AEW, and transport aircraft, helicopters, and UAV development projects.

The Indian Navy needs to review and reorient the trajectory of naval aircraft development. The course corrections are needed to overcome current limitations, stimulate and elevate the self-reliance trajectory of naval aviation. These are short and mid-term course corrections. The transformation of IN into builders' navy in naval aviation, is the need of the hour. The ownership, decision-making, and leadership are essential to enhance the success rate of indigenous naval aviation development projects. The Indian Navy, well known for taking ownership of shipbuilding, should be able to achieve similar Atmanirbharta trajectory in the naval aviation by instituting suitable policy and structural reforms, and launching or joining indigenous aviation development projects.
